docs: add SS 7.8 to 8.0 upgrade guide (#3522)
nordic-institute/X-Road: doc/Manuals/ig-ss_x-road_v8_security_server_upgrade_guide.md

  - [Beta 2 caveats](#beta-2-caveats)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Before you start](#before-you-start)
- [Upgrade with the wizard](#upgrade-with-the-wizard)
  - [Get the wizard](#get-the-wizard)
  - [Interactive mode](#interactive-mode)
  - [Unattended mode (env vars)](#unattended-mode-env-vars)
  - [Unattended mode (config file)](#unattended-mode-config-file)
  - [What the wizard does](#what-the-wizard-does)
  - [Resuming after a failed run](#resuming-after-a-failed-run)
- [Manual upgrade procedure](#manual-upgrade-procedure)
- [Post-upgrade verification](#post-upgrade-verification)
- [Rollback](#rollback)
  - [Rollback from a snapshot (recommended)](#rollback-from-a-snapshot-recommended)
  - [Rollback by downgrading packages](#rollback-by-downgrading-packages)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [References](#references)

## Overview

This guide walks you through upgrading an existing X-Road 7.8 Security Server to X-Road 8 (beta 2 `*`) using the official upgrade wizard (`xroad-upgrade.sh`). It also documents the equivalent manual procedure for situations where the wizard cannot be used, and provides rollback guidance.

> ### What this guide covers

Reviewer: It should probably be specified here that the guide only covers single Security Server instances (clusters are not covered)?

> - Native-package Security Server installations (DEB on Ubuntu, RPM on RHEL/Rocky/Alma)

Reviewer: When it comes to RPM, only RHEL is officially supported. Therefore, Rocky and Alma should be removed.

- Both interactive (whiptail) and unattended (env-var/config-file) execution modes
- Step-by-step manual procedure as an alternative to the wizard
- Post-upgrade verification
- Rollback options

> ### What this guide does not cover

Reviewer: Security Server clusters should probably be mentioned here?

- **Central Server upgrades** — covered in a separate document `*`

> - **Container or Kubernetes deployments** — these follow a different upgrade path

Reviewer: This should be covered in a separate document too.

- **Ansible-driven upgrades** — covered in a separate document `*`
- Upgrade from X-Road versions older than 7.8.x — must first be brought to 7.8.x

### Beta 2 caveats

- This procedure targets X-Road 8 beta 2. Pre-release software may behave differently from the final 8.0 release.

> - Specific beta 2 disclaimers (data loss policy, supported rollback, breaking changes) `*`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Disclaimer

This document applies to X-Road 8 Beta 2. Pre-release software may behave differently from the final X-Road 8.0 release.
```

## Prerequisites

Before starting, confirm the following on the Security Server:

| Requirement | Notes |
|---|---|

> | Operating system | Ubuntu Server 22.04 / 24.04 LTS, or RHEL 8 / 9 / 10 (and binary-compatible Rocky / Alma) |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Operating system | Ubuntu Server 22.04 / 24.04 LTS, or RHEL 8 / 9 / 10 |
```

| Current X-Road version | 7.8.x (any patch level). Earlier versions must first be upgraded to 7.8.x. |
| PostgreSQL major version | 15 or newer. The wizard verifies this automatically. |
| Disk space | `*` — at least *N* GB free in `/var` (jar download, config backups, package upgrade) |
| Network reachability | Outbound HTTPS to the X-Road 8 package repository (`*` — exact URL TBD), the OpenBao package repository (`https://pkgs.openbao.org`), and the migration-CLI artifact URL (`*` — exact URL TBD) |
| Root / sudo access | Required for all steps |
| Backup | A current backup of the Security Server (configuration, databases, signer keys) is **strongly recommended** — see [Before you start](#before-you-start) |

Verify your current X-Road version:

```bash
# Ubuntu / Debian
dpkg-query -W -f='${Version}\n' xroad-proxy

> # RHEL / Rocky / Alma

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# RHEL
```

2. **Notify users / pause inbound traffic.** Services will be stopped for the duration of the upgrade.

3. **Take a host snapshot if possible** (LXD, hypervisor snapshot, cloud-provider snapshot). This is the cleanest rollback path — see [Rollback](#rollback).

4. **Decide on execution mode** — interactive for hands-on upgrades, unattended for Ansible or automated runs.

5. **Have these values ready** (you will pass them to the wizard):
   - `XROAD_MIGRATION_CLI_URL` — URL to the `migration-cli.jar` artifact for X-Road 8 beta 2 `*`
   - `XROAD_REPO_BASE_URL` — base URL of the X-Road 8 package repository (default: `https://artifactory.niis.org`)
   - `XROAD_REPO_MAIN` — repository name for your distribution (`*` — exact name for beta 2 TBD, e.g. `xroad8-snapshot-deb` / `xroad8-snapshot-rpm`)
   - `OPENBAO_MIRROR` and `OPENBAO_MIRROR_USER` — only if you use a private OpenBao mirror; leave empty for the official `pkgs.openbao.org`

## Upgrade with the wizard

### Get the wizard

> Obtain the X-Road installer package (which includes the upgrade wizard) from the official distribution channel `*` (release URL / Artifactory path for beta 2 TBD).

Reviewer: Please add the command to download the installer package.

| `Migration CLI step '<step>' reported an error: …` | The migration-CLI itself printed a stack trace | Inspect the log; fix the underlying issue (e.g. malformed `db.properties`); re-run the wizard — completed steps are skipped |
| `Service <name> did not stop within 60 seconds` | A service is stuck or has long-running connections | Investigate with `systemctl status <name>`; once stopped manually, re-run the wizard |
| `Package manager reported success but xroad-securityserver version did not change (still 7.8.x)` | V8 repository has no package for your CPU architecture, or the repo URL points to a wrong distribution | Verify `XROAD_REPO_BASE_URL` and `XROAD_REPO_MAIN`, confirm packages exist for your `dpkg --print-architecture` / `uname -m` |
| `configure-mirror-openbao-deb.sh not found at …` | The installer was not extracted with the bundled `lib/` helpers | Re-extract the installer tarball preserving directory structure |
| `signer-token-pins` skipped unexpectedly | `xroad-autologin` was not installed | Install `xroad-autologin` first or supply the script path explicitly |

**Getting help:**

> If you cannot resolve a failure, attach the wizard log and the contents of `/var/lib/xroad-upgrade/` to your support request. `*` Confirm support contact for beta 2.

Reviewer: @raits Let's create a new GitHub discussion for beta 2 and add a link to it here.

| `set-property` (batch signing) | Sets `xroad.proxy.batch-signing-enabled=true` only if the operator chose to preserve the X-Road 7 behavior. See [Operator choices](#operator-choices). |
| `set-property` (strict identifier checks) | Sets `xroad.proxy.strict-identifier-checks=false` if the operator chose to preserve the X-Road 7 behavior. See [Operator choices](#operator-choices). |

Inspect the wizard log for any Java stack traces. Migration-CLI sub-commands sometimes return exit 0 even after an internal exception; the wizard scans the output and treats any line matching `Error `, `Caused by:`, `Exception in `, or `<Class>Exception:` as a failure.

### Operator choices

Two semantics changed between X-Road 7 and X-Road 8. The wizard asks once for each (interactive) or applies a documented default (unattended).

**Batch signing** (`xroad.proxy.batch-signing-enabled`).

- X-Road 7 behavior: enabled. The signer batches multiple message signatures into a single signing operation.

> - X-Road 8 default: disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- X-Road 8 default: disabled. Each message is signed separately. 
```

- Interactive prompt default: disabled (X-Road 8 default).
- Unattended default: disabled (X-Road 8 default).
- Choose "Yes" only if you intentionally rely on the X-Road 7 batching behavior.

**Strict identifier checks** (`xroad.proxy.strict-identifier-checks`).

> - What it gates: validation of X-Road identifier fields (instance, member class, member code, subsystem, etc.). The allowed character set is `A-Z`, `a-z`, `0-9`, and `'()+,-.=?`. Any other character (including spaces, slashes, brackets, accented characters) makes the identifier invalid.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- What it validates: X-Road identifier fields (instance, member class, member code, subsystem, etc.). The allowed character set consists of `A–Z`, `a–z`, `0–9`, and the following characters: '()+,-.=?. Any other character (including spaces, slashes, brackets, or accented characters) makes the identifier invalid.
```
